=======
Privacy
=======

Information Stored By Third Parties
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Third parties — like your phone company, your Internet service provider,
the web sites you visit and interact with or the search engine that you
use — regularly collect a great deal of sensitive information about how
you use the phone system and the Internet, such as information about who
you’re calling, who’s emailing or IMing you, what web pages you’re
reading, what you’re searching for online, and more. In addition to
those records being compiled about you, there’s also data that you
choose to store with third parties, like the voicemails you store with
you cell phone company or the emails you store with your email provider.
In this section, we’ll talk about the legal rules that govern when and
how law enforcement agents can obtain this kind of information stored by
and with third parties. We’ll then outline steps that you can take to
reduce that risk, by learning how to reduce the amount of information
collected about you by third parties, minimize the amount of data you
choose to store with third parties, or replace plainly readable data
with encrypted versions for storage with third parties.


Logfiles
========

Records Collected by Search Engines and Other Web Sites May Not Be Protected
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In addition to the logs kept by your communications providers, there are
also logs kept by the Web sites that you visit. For example, the Apache
web server is currently the most widely used web server on the Internet.
In its default configuration, it logs the following information about
each request it receives from a web browser:

-  requesting host name/IP address
-  username of requester (rarely present)
-  time of request
-  first line of request (indicating requested page, plus some
   parameters)
-  success or failure of request
-  size of response in bytes
-  the previous page viewed by requester (if any)
-  the name and version of the web browser used

However, the server could potentially be configured to log anything you
or your browser tells it, in addition to the above. The Stored
Communications Act clearly protects records held by companies that offer
the public the ability to send and receive communications — phone
companies, ISPs, webmail providers, IM providers, bulletin board sites,
etc. However, it does not necessarily protect logs held by web sites
that don’t offer communications service, which is most of them. This is
particularly worrisome when it comes to search engines. The government’s
position is that logs kept by search engines are not protected by the
Stored Communications Act *at all*. Considering that these logs can
often be linked back to you — either by your IP address or “cookies,”
or, if you’ve registered with other services offered by the search
engine, by the information you entered when registering — this potential
gap in legal protection represents a serious privacy threat.



Stronger Protection for Personal Content
========================================

Emails, Voicemails, and Other Communications Content Stored by Your Communications Providers Receive Stronger Protection
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Compared to the relatively weak protection for non-content records, the
law gives some extra protection to communications content that you have
stored with (or that is otherwise stored by) communications service
providers like your phone company, your ISP, or an email provider like
Gmail or Hotmail. Your communications providers cannot disclose your
stored communications to the government unless the government satisfies
the requirements described below; nor can they disclose your stored
communications to anyone other than the government without your
permission. There is one notable exception, though, for serious
emergencies: if the provider believes in good faith that not immediately
disclosing the communications could lead to someone’s death or serious
injury, they can give them to the government. 

Note, however, that these
restrictions on the disclosure of your communications only apply to
communications providers that offer their services to the public. Even
more worrisome, the government doesn’t consider businesses or schools
and universities that offer their employees and students service to be
offering services to the public, and therefore considers them
unprotected by the Stored Communications Act. That means they could get
communications from those entities with only a subpoena, and maybe even
just a polite request if your employee agreement or your school’s
privacy policy allows it.

.. raw:: html

   <div>

**Privacy tip:** Use communications providers that serve the
public!Don’t let some friend with a mail server in his basement handle
your email service unless he is very trustworthy — unlike a regular ISP
or public web-mail service, there are no legal restrictions on who your
friend shares your emails with.

.. raw:: html

   </div>
   
The Stored Communications Act strongly protects communications that have
been in ‘electronic storage’ for 180 days or less, but the government
has a very narrow reading of what ‘electronic storage’ means in the
statute. The government doesn’t consider already-read or opened incoming
communications to be in electronic storage (for example, emails in your
inbox that you’ve already looked at, or voicemails in your voicemail
account that you’ve saved after listening). Nor does the government
consider messages in your sent box or messages in your drafts box to be
in ‘electronic storage.’ Under the government’s view, here’s how your
communications are treated under the law: 

**New unopened
communications:** If the email or voice-mail messages are unopened or
unlistened to, and have been in storage for 180 days or less, the police
must get a search warrant. However, you are not notified of the search.

**Opened or old communications:** If you have opened the stored email or
voice-mail messages, or they are unopened and have been stored for more
than 180 days, the government can use a special court order — the same
“D” orders discussed — or a subpoena to demand your communications.
Either way, the government has to give you notice (although, like with
sneak & peek search warrants, that notice can sometimes be delayed for a
substantial time, and as far as we can tell almost always is delayed).
However, the police may still choose to use a search warrant instead of
a D order or subpoena, so they don’t have to give you notice at all.

Notably, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals has disagreed with the
government’s reading of the law, finding that communications are in
electronic storage even after they are opened — meaning that the
government needs a warrant to obtain opened messages in storage for 180
days or less.

.. raw:: html

   <div>

**Privacy tip:** Use communications providers based in
CaliforniaCommunications providers in states that are in the Ninth
Circuit, such as California, are bound by Ninth Circuit law and
therefore are very resistant to providing the government with opened
emails that are 180 days old or less without a warrant.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

In sum, although the law sometimes requires the government to get a
warrant before accessing communications you’ve stored with your
communication provider, it doesn’t always. For this reason, storing your
communications on your own computer is preferable — the government will
almost always need a warrant if it wants to seize and search the files
on your computer.


Threads from Governments
========================

What Can the Government Do?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In addition to being able to use wiretaps to intercept your
communications while they are being transmitted, the government has a
variety of ways of getting (1) records about your communications and (2)
the content of communications that you have stored with a third party.
In particular, the government can get all of the records that your ISP,
phone company, or other communications service providers have on you,
and the SMS messages, instant messages, emails or voice-mails you’ve
stored with them. However, unlike regular third-party records discussed
above, which can be subpoenaed without any notice to you, the records of
your communications providers are given some extra protection by the
“Stored Communications Act” portion of the “Electronic Communications
Privacy Act”, or ECPA. Depending on your country, governments might be
interested in

-  Name.
-  Address.
-  The length of time you’ve used that phone or Internet company, along
   with service start date and the types of services you use.
-  Phone records. They can get your telephone number, as well as local
   and long distance telephone connection records — those are records
   identifying all the phone numbers you’ve called or have called you,
   and the time and length of each call.
-  Internet records. They can get the times you signed on and off of the
   service, the length of each session, and the IP address that the ISP
   assigned to you for each session.
-  Information on how you pay your bill, including any credit card or
   bank account number the ISP or phone company has on file.

Most governments can get this information with no notice to you at all,
and can also get a court order forcing your service provider not to tell
you or anyone else.

  Meta-data is endangered as well:

-  The email addresses of people you send emails to and receive emails
   from, the time each email is sent and received, and the size of each
   email
-  The IP addresses of other computers on the Internet that you
   communicate with, when you communicated with them, and how much data
   was exchanged
-  The web addresses of the web pages that you visit

Which, if any, of the above are logged varies, depending on your
particular ISP or email provider’s privacy policies and resources.
However, just about every ISP will log IP addresses and log-on/off
times, and keep those logs for at least a few months. Cellular phone
companies may also keep records of which cell tower your phone
communicated with when you were making calls. These cell site tower
records can help pinpoint your physical location at points in the past,
and are increasingly the target of law enforcement investigations. And
although some courts have required the government to obtain a warrant
based on probable cause before obtaining these records, the government’s
usual practice is to get such records based on the much lower “D” Order
standard.
